Create pests.md (#9)
talkvegantome/talkvegan-hugo: content/english/anti-vegan/pests.md

---
title: "Pests"
date: 2019-10-08T06:15:53+13:00
lastmod: 2019-10-08T06:15:53+13:00
draft: true
description: "How to respond to the argument: Veganism fails to adequately address environmental concerns; specifically pest control."
weight: 5
---

# Argument

> > Veganism is often criticised for failing to adequately address environmental concerns; specifically pest control.

Reviewer: Maybe `vegan farming concerns`? As I feel like environmental concerns are one of the most-addressed issues in veganism generally?

Author: No no no.... That would be to entirely miss the point. Vegan farming (while animal focussed) is stir primarily a human concern.  Often addressed perhaps, but that's due to it's importance, and one vegans often dodge or straw man in answering.

# Rebuttal

## Quick Response

> > Environmental Ethics is complex and difficult. Even assuming we can reach agreement on the definition of pest it does not automatically follow that humans *ought* to control or eradicate this species.

Reviewer: I would add something into this about possible and practicable again. It feels like repetition when you're writing article after article, but people won't read it that way!
Something along the lines of:
> Crop farming has a long way to come to fulfil the highest standards of vegan ethics, and with limited options that fulfil these values, it's usually out of reach of most vegans to source their food from veganic farms.

Reviewer: I think we should present it as a valid option too actually. That we can abstain from the labelling of pests entirely and simply hold up veganic farming as an ideal which intends to discourage the intervention of other animals in crop farming without labelling them as pests. (an interventionist vs pacifist distinction if you like.)

Author: Nope. For the reasons above. The argument in not about vegan farming. Yes, pests are not a relevant term in vegan crop farming (and hence the labelling of wild rabbits as pest fails under leopold). But to take a pests don't exist approach doesn't work with environmental issues.

Reviewer: Fair point! Let me sleep on it and come at it with fresh eyes as I think we've just been talking about it so much I looked at it and immediately thought farming!

  
## Detail - Analytic

It is difficult to interpret how the central tenet of veganism *‘avoid exploitation of and cruelty to animals'* might be applied in complex environmental considerations. 

> However, before we try, numerous concepts require unpacking.

Reviewer: `a few` rather than numerous? less intimidating is better 😄

Author: Yup.

### 1. Veganism is moral standpoint. 

> Veganism is not a moral theory.  Veganism is a moral standpoint regarding the (mis)treatment of animals by (most) humans, either directly or by acquiescence. We can’t expect specific moral standpoints to offer complete answers to questions that are fully or partially outside their scope.  That said, there is considerable crossover between environmental and animal concerns so intuitively we expect that vegans ought to hold a position on environmental issues     

Reviewer: `acquiescence` needs unpacking into something less syllabophillic :p

Author: Yeah, new it would.

Author: Passive acceptance

Reviewer: Perfect!

### 2. What is a pest?

> Pest is commonly defined along the lines of any “small animal which damages crops or food supplies” (Collins) or “any animal or plant detrimental to human concerns” (Wikipedia).  

Reviewer: Can we link collins and wikipedia here?

Author: Yup. Will do.

> Speciesism is a form of discrimination based on species membership. It involves treating members of one species as morally more important than members of other species even when their interests are equivalent.  
>  - [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speciesism)

Vegans will NOT accept this deginition of pest as it is 'speciesist’. That an animal’s interests conflict with human interests is not, in itself, a reason for defining the animal as a pest or for taking action against them. Where crops are concerned alternative means such as fencing, sonics, and eco-friendly organic practices are available.  

## Re-defining ‘pest’.

> "A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.”  

> > - Aldo Leopold (1949) [The Land Ethic](https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil3140/Leopold.pdf) 

Reviewer: Can you pass this through web.archive.org? Wherever possible I want to link to web.archive.org copies of web pages because otherwise the links tend to break after a few years! You can search for the article here: https://web.archive.org and in this case it looks like: https://web.archive.org/web/20180219150335/https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil3140/Leopold.pdf

> Aldo Leopold, the father of environmental ethics, provided a non-speciesist definition of pest when he claimed “A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of the biotic community. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.”  If we apply this axiom a species is a pest when, regardless of human interest, it upsets the stability of, interrupts the integrity of, or leads to the destruction of the environment.  

Reviewer: `definition` instead of `axiom`?

Author: K :)

Two New Zealand specific examples:

### Are wild rabbits a pest?

> Biosecurity NZ lists rabbits as pests because they ‘compete with livestock, cause extensive damage to farming land, cause public nuisance… 

Reviewer: Can we cite this? (preferably via web.archive.org?)

> So, yes, they are annoying to (some) humans but they are not a ‘pest’. The reasons provided by Biosecurity NZ fail under Leopold’s criteria. If wild rabbits are a pest other substantive, non-speciesist, reasons must be provided.

Reviewer: `substantive` is not a word regular English speakers understand :p

Author: Really? maybe 'more substantial?'

Reviewer: Perfect!

### Are possums a pest?

Possums occur in high numbers in NZ, breed fast and face very few predators. Without doubt possums have a major impact on New Zealands native ecosystems.

> Biosecurity NZ lists possums as pests, as, “Leaves are the main part of their diet, but possums are opportunistic omnivores. They eat buds, flowers, fruit/berries and nectar, which means they compete with native birds and reptiles for food sources. The growth and life-cycle of a tree or plant is significantly affected when all parts of it are eaten. Possums also have ‘favourites’ such as rātā or kamahi trees, leading to an even greater impact on these species.  …Possums were [also]filmed eating the eggs and chicks of kōkako …  They eat invertebrates, including weta, and are significant predators of New Zealand land snails such as Powelliphanta. They often occupy holes in tree trunks for their nests which would otherwise be used by nesting birds such as kākāriki and saddlebacks. …Researchers using nest-cameras have witnessed … kea nests invaded by stoats and possums in South Westland. ”

Reviewer: Can we cite the Biosecurity NZ listing? (preferably via web.archive.org?)

Author: OK.

Here it would seem possums can be defined as a ‘pest species’ that directly impacts the ecosystem, without any reference to human specific interests.

### To recap

> 1. Vegans can classify a species as a pest by reference to a non-speciesist definition.

Reviewer: I would be tempted to say `Within a vegan ethic it is reasonable to classify ...` to weaken the feeling that we are saying it is necessary to do so.

Author: k :)

2. Even when a species is classified as a pest the tenets of veganism require that they NOT be exploited or treated cruelly
3. Veganism is a moral standpoint so we should not expect it to prescribe a course of action. Rather, veganism limits how we might act (and certainly the manner in which we act)

> ### So where to from here? 

Reviewer: I'm torn on this whole section. It speaks to me personally because it helps me fit all of this into philosophical frameworks with which I'm familiar. But I'm also very conscious that philosophy with its technical `isms` is very offputting to most people. In order to make it accessible we need to translate it, and this section is aimed more at giving people the tools for interpreting the arguments in a technical sense than it is providing easy intelligible rebuttals.

I think we have to cut it or just keep the set of links for further reading because otherwise we risk losing sight of the target audience. It makes me really sad to say that, as I think it's good content, but for a much more specific audience.

Author: Will have another look. Might depend on answers (above) to the general focus.

Reviewer: Thanks Tery!

Author: Could we do an internal anchor and a warning.... This section gets a bit technical and is included for.... and a skip to final thoughts ?

Reviewer: Tell you what, let's make it "Philosophy Corner" and treat it like an appendix. Keep the warning above but shift the "Final Thoughts"  and "Recap" to before the Philosophy Corner section. How does that strike you?
The internal anchor won't be supported by the app unfortunately.

Author: Goodly idea. Think it will work...

Here it would seem possums can be defined as a ‘pest species’ that directly impacts the ecosystem, without any reference to human specific interests.

### To recap

Vegans may still object to the term 'pest'. A species that is out-of-place in the eco-system is, in most cases, due to past meddling by humans and not a fault of the species. 

Vegans can classify a species as problematic by reference to Leopold's non-speciesist definition. However, once identified, any action taken must *as far as is possible and practicable* be neither exploitive nor unnecessarily cruel.

### So where to from here? 

While the ideals of veganism are always placed first, individual vegans will differ on what, if any, actions ought to be taken. This can range from 'do nothing' (*all species have a right to life*) to 'controlling possums' (applying the golden rule of *acting to bring about the least harm*)

This is discussed in more depth in the appendix.

### Final thoughts

> Identifying a species as problematic does not commit a vegan to act in any specific manner. However, that vegans can offer a non-speciesist definition of 'pest' and can argue for a specific approach in dealing with them demonstrates that vegans can address complex environmental concerns.

Reviewer: This paragraph in particular reads quite repetitiously after 'So where to from here?" Can we combine these two sections?

Author: Does a bit... so yup

> While there may be disagreement amongst vegans regarding the moral course of action there is agreement that any actions must *as far as is possible and practicable* not be exploitive or unnecessarily cruel.

Reviewer: Can we put this in the quick response too? I like it :D

Author: Done

This is no different from individuals facing any difficult complex moral questions. Conflicts of opinion arise over euthanasia, abortion, freedom of speech, and many others.

## Appendix.

### Warning: Going Philosophical

> Sorry, but the next section gets a little academic. The author believes it necessary but it's the sort of stuff that causes some people to gnaw their own limbs off. If you are interested in the philosophical underpinning great... read on...

Reviewer: Let's not apologise! Just warn.
How about
Title: 
> Fitting all this into ethical philosophy

Disclaimer: 
> This section discusses ethical theory in some depth. Dive in if you're interested, but the arguments above should be enough to serve you in your day-to-day discussions.

Author: Ahhh. can I keep douglas adams

*Please note that an extremely simplified version of rights based and utilitarian based ethics has been presented here. If you're interested we suggest the following reading:*

> [Animal Liberation](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Animal-Liberation-Peter-Singer/dp/0712674446) by Peter Singer (1995) 

> [The Case for Animal Rights](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Case-Animal-Rights-Tom-Regan/dp/0520243862/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=tom+regan&qid=1570343357&s=books&sr=1-1) by Tom Regan (2004) 

> [Animals--Property or Persons?](https://law.bepress.com/rutgersnewarklwps/art21/) (2004) by Gary Francine 

> Wikipedia pages for [Peter Singer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Singer),  [Tom Regan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Regan), [Gary Francione](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gary_L._Francione)

> Also worth reading *(and cited in this article)*

> [The Land Ethic](https://rintintin.colorado.edu/~vancecd/phil3140/Leopold.pdf) (1949) Aldo Leopold  
> *But be warned*: Leopold holds an enviromentalist position, not a vegan position. 

> <a name="ft"></a>

Reviewer: Let's remove this otherwise it'll appear in the app!

While the ideals of veganism are always placed first, individual vegans will differ on what, if any, actions ought to be taken. This can range from 'do nothing' (*all species have a right to life*) to 'controlling possums' (applying the golden rule of *acting to bring about the least harm*)

*This is discussed in more depth in the appendix.*

This disagreement over 'how to act' is no different from individuals facing any difficult complex moral questions. Conflicts of opinion arise over euthanasia, abortion, freedom of speech, and many others.

## Appendix.

### Fitting all this into Ethical Philosophical

The next section discusses ethical theory in some depth.  Dive in if you're interested, but it's the sort of stuff that causes some people to gnaw their own limbs off.

If you decide to skip this section the arguments above should be enough to serve you in your day-to-day discussions.

### Back to the recap.

> 1. Vegans can classify a species as a pest by reference to a non-speciesist definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Within a vegan ethic it is reasonable to classify a species as a pest by reference to a non-speciesist definition.
```
